# DEFINE: Mapping Model Revisions

## Problem

Current set theory relationships defined in the experimental model are not suitable for all matching approaches listed in the provenance assembly: lexical, logical, semantical, syntactical, functional. Also need to consider alternative naming of `matching` to avoid conflicts with context in other assemblies/models.

| Element                        | Response                                                                      |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Current Spiral Sequence Number | [2023-08-07.003.md](2023-08-07.003.md)                                        |
| GitHub Project Link            | https://github.com/usnistgov/OSCAL/                                           |
| GitHub Issue #                 | 1332[^Issue-1332] 1333[^Issue-1333]                               |
| Author(s)                      | Michaela Iorga                                                          |
| Impact                         |                                                                               |
| Criticality                    | Significant                                                                   |
| Scope                          | Project, Public Capabilities                                                  |
| Audience                       | Control Framework Mapping Experts, Framework Organizations, GRC Practitioners |

## Discovery 

### Matching Relationships

Current set theory relationships defined in the experimental model are not suitable for all matching approaches listed: lexical, logical, semantical, syntactical, functional. 

The [NISTIR 8278 r1 ](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2022/NIST.IR.8278r1.ipd.pdf) supports set theory based relationships only for syntactic, semantic, and functional approaches.
The documents reads:

_The basic reason why a Reference Document Element and a Focal Document Element are related is attributed to one of three_ ```rationales```:

_**Syntactic*** – Compares the linguistic meaning of the two elements. For example, the following statements have the same syntax:_
```
printf (“bar”); [... C programming language] 
printf (“bar”); [... C programming language]
```
_**Semantic** – Compares the contextual meaning of the two elements. For example, the following statements convey the same semantic meaning:_
```
“The organization employs a firewall at the network perimeter.”
“The enterprise uses a device that has a network protection application installed to safeguard the network from intentional or unintentional intrusion.”
```
_**Functional** – Compares the functions of the two elements. For example, the following statements have the same functional result:_
```
printf (“foo\n”); [... C programming language] 
print “foo” [... BASIC programming language]
```

**Lexical** analysis is the process of breaking down a large text into smaller parts, such as words, phrases or symbols, while **syntax** analysis is the process of understanding how these parts fit together to form meaningful sentences.  Lexical decomposition into fine-grain parts of the mapped controls and analysis of the correlation of the source control parts to the target control parts appears to be the most suitable for automation. Set theory can be applied to those fine-grain parts of the source control and the target control in determining the relationship.

**Lexical analysis** is used in natural language processing (NLP) to break down natural language text into individual words and phrases that can be more easily processed by NLP algorithms.

**Syntax analysis** is used in natural language processing to analyze and understand the structure of sentences in a language. It helps identify the parts of speech (noun, verb, pronoun, etc.), determines the relationships between the words, and constructs a parse tree that represents the hierarchical structure of the sentence.

Lexical analysis is the first step in natural language processing. It is the process of breaking down a large text into smaller parts, such as words, phrases, or symbols, and assigning them meaning.  Next step is syntax analysis which is the process of understanding how words fit together to form meaningful sentences. This is done by using grammar rules, which define the structure of a sentence. For example, in English, grammar rules would determine whether a sentence should have a subject, verb, and object, or if it should be in the active or passive voice. Nice summary is available [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/lexical-analysis-and-syntax-analysis/)
A more comprehensive logic analysis material is [here](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/POS/Turchap6.html#:~:text=THUS%2C%20to%20make%20a%20logical,structure%20of%20the%20logical%20expression.). The lecture presents Logic Theory (Aristotelian, Hegel's dialectic,  mathematical , logical connectives ) demonstrates that in NLP, logical analysis is essentially a semantic analysis, and syntactical analysis is necessary for semantic analysis.

 **Logical** relationships in a language are briefly described [here](https://josecarilloforum.com/forum/index.php?topic=86.0). A document introducing the Logical relations amongst sentences is [here](http://ling-blogs.bu.edu/lx502f09/files/2009/10/LX502_LogicalRelations1.pdf)

## Matching Assembly Name

IMPORTANT: We cannot use matching in this context since it conflicts with the Profile > import> include-controls > matching

The NISTIR 8278 r1 calls relationship rationale
rationale = a set of reasons or a logical basis for a course of action or a particular belief.
We labeled the information type  matching alluding to the matching type or approach (logical, lexical, semantical, etc).
If source-control < equivalent-to > target-control using a functional matching approach vs a semantic matching approach, are we correct considering functional or semantic approach the rational for the equivalent-to relationship? If the answer is "yes", then maybe we should align this work with NIST's previous work and call the property rationale. If the answer is "no" we could call it approach or matching-type .

Question: Should we enforce, through the matching-type property at the document/metadata level, for all relations within one document to be of the same type, or do we allow for the property to be overwritten at the relationship level?

## Matching Assembly Name

IMPORTANT: We cannot use matching in this context since it conflicts with the Profile > import> include-controls > matching

The NISTIR 8278 r1 calls relationship rationale
rationale = a set of reasons or a logical basis for a course of action or a particular belief.
We labeled the information type  matching alluding to the matching type or approach (logical, lexical, semantical, etc).
If source-control < equivalent-to > target-control using a functional matching approach vs a semantic matching approach, are we correct considering functional or semantic approach the rational for the equivalent-to relationship? If the answer is "yes", then maybe we should align this work with NIST's previous work and call the property rationale. If the answer is "no" we could call it approach or matching-type .

Question: Should we enforce, through the matching-type property at the document/metadata level, for all relations within one document to be of the same type, or do we allow for the property to be overwritten at the relationship level?

## Interpretation

### Analysis

- lexical analysis breaks down a large text into smaller parts, such as words, phrases or symbols, 
- syntax analysis is the process of understanding the grammar (what are the words: nouns, verbs, etc., the voice used: passive, active, imperative, etc.), and supports the semantic analysis
- semantic analysis helps to determine the meaning of a sentence or phrase.
- functional analysis identifies the outcome, the result of the statement
- logical analysis is used as a tool for reasoning, combining ideas, deducing new rules

So, in the [NISTIR 8278 r1 ](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2022/NIST.IR.8278r1.ipd.pdf), the _functional_ example also shows 2 statements that have the same syntax, such as: ```function(argument)```.

```
printf (“foo\n”)
print “foo”
```
Functionally they produce the same outcome: ```foo``` gets printed. 

### Recommended Actions

1) If we keep only the set theory based relationships currently defined in the draft OSCAL Mapping model, then the ```logical``` and ```syntactical``` matching approaches should be eliminated from the list. We can allow them to be defined outside core OSCAL in association with proper relationships. 
2) If we keep the ```logical``` and ```syntactical``` matching approaches, we need to define proper logical and syntactical relationships and provide clear examples highlighting the differences between them. I personally do not see any strong reason for supporting logical and syntactical (grammar analysis) matching approaches.

3) Rename ```mapping-collection > provenance > matching``` with ```mapping-collection > provenance > matching-type``` or ```mapping-collection > provenance > approach``` (see IMPORTANT note on line 58 above).

4) Allow ```mapping-collection > provenance > method``` to document automatically-generated, human-reviewed methods by allowing a third value either ```both``` or ```endorsed``` or ```verified``` .

5) Rename ```mapping-collection > qualifier > category``` with ```mapping-collection > qualifier > resolvability``` (see note in issue #27)
  
7) Update the allowed values to also be defined for ```mapping-collection > qualifier > resolvability``` and rename the existing oens to:
   ```
   restrictive 
   addressable
   ```
   Consider removing ```blocked``` as it would lead to a not mappable situation since it would be captured in the ```gap``` assembly (see 9) below and issue #29)
   
8) Add a NEW property ```mapping-collection > qualifier > category``` that will allow to document which aspect of the ```source```, ```target``` or ```both``` is the ```mapping-collection > provenance > predicate``` applicable to: _requirement, parameter, objective, assessment-method,_ or _evidence_.

9) Create: ```mapping-collection > gap``` with the following proposed outline:

````
gap [0 or 1] :
{
    subject [1]: string,
    A choice of:
        include-controls [1] : { 
            with-child-controls [0 or 1]: token,
            with-ids [0 or 1]: [ … ],
            matching [0 or 1]: [ … ],
        },
        link [1]: {
            href [1]: uri-reference,
            rel [0 or 1]: token,
            media-type [0 or 1]: string,
            resource-fragment [0 or 1]: string,
            text [0 or 1]: markup-line,
        },
    props [0 or 1]: [
        An array of prop objects [1 to ∞] {
            name [1]: token,
            uuid [0 or 1]: uuid,
            ns [0 or 1]: uri,
            value [1]: string,
            class [0 or 1]: token,
            group [0 or 1]: token,
            remarks [0 or 1]: markup-multiline,
        },
    remarks [0 or 1]: markup-multiline,
}
```
